Add v23.2.1 cloud-first release notes (#18293)
cockroachdb/docs: src/current/_includes/releases/v23.2/v23.2.1.md

## v23.2.1

Release Date: February 15, 2024

{% include releases/release-downloads-docker-image.md release=include.release %}

<h3 id="v23-2-1-security-updates">Security updates</h3>

> - Introduced the `server.redact_sensitive_settings.enabled` [cluster setting](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/cluster-settings), which is false by default. If set to true, then the values of the following settings will be redacted when accessed through `SHOW` commands or other introspection interfaces. In the future, any other sensitive cluster settings that are added will be redacted as well. Users who have the `MODIFYCLUSTERSETTING` [privilege](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/security-reference/authorization#managing-privileges) can always view the unredacted settings. [#117729][#117729]

Author: ✅

    - `server.oidc_authentication.client_id`
    - `server.oidc_authentication.client_secret`
- If the `server.redact_sensitive_settings.enabled` [cluster setting](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/cluster-settings) is set to true, then the `MANAGEVIRTUALCLUSTER` [privilege](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/security-reference/authorization#managing-privileges) is required to view the values of the per-virtual-cluster overrides for sensitive cluster settings. [#117729][#117729]

<h3 id="v23-2-1-general-changes">General changes</h3>

> - Updated Go version to 1.21.3 [#115339][#115339]

Author: ✅

<h3 id="v23-2-1-{{-site.data.products.enterprise-}}-edition-changes">{{ site.data.products.enterprise }} edition changes</h3>

- Added a new [SQL function](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/functions-and-operators) `fips_ready`, which can be used to verify the [FIPS](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/fips) readiness of the [gateway node](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/architecture/life-of-a-distributed-transaction#gateway). [#115202][#115202]

> - [Physical Cluster Replication (PCR)](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/physical-cluster-replication-overview) now retries for just over 3 minutes before failing. [#116402][#116402]

Author: ✅

- Fixed a bug where [changefeeds](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/create-and-configure-changefeeds) that targeted schema-locked tables could fail due to a very old highwater timestamp being incorrectly persisted. [#117961][#117961]

> - Fixed a bug where creating a [changefeed](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/create-and-configure-changefeeds) that targeted tables with a [`DECIMAL(n)`](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/decimal) column (i.e. zero-scale `DECIMAL` column), `format='avro'`, and `diff` would cause a panic. [#118895][#118895]

Author: ✅

<h3 id="v23-2-1-sql-language-changes">SQL language changes</h3>

> - Added the `sql.ttl.default_select_rate_limit` [cluster setting](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/cluster-settings) and the `ttl_select_rate_limit` table [storage parameter](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/row-level-ttl#ttl-storage-parameters) to set the [TTL](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/row-level-ttl) select rate limit. This sets the number of records per table per second per node that can be selected by the [TTL job](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/row-level-ttl#view-scheduled-ttl-jobs). [cockroachdb/cockroach#115801][#115801]

Author: Fixed here and elsewhere. Artifact of editing

> - Fixed a bug in [PL/pgSQL](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/plpgsql) where altering the name of a [sequence](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/create-sequence) or [user-defined type (UDT)](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/create-type) that was used in a PL/pgSQL function or procedure could break them. This bug was only present in 23.2 alpha and beta releases. [#116419][#116419]

Author: did the edit

added the links! thanks

> - Fixed a bug in [PL/pgSQL](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/plpgsql) where altering the name of a [sequence](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/create-sequence) or [user-defined type (UDT)](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/create-type) that was used in a PL/pgSQL function or procedure could break them. This bug affected routines that were created in an implicit transaction, and not using `CREATE OR REPLACE` syntax. [#117330][#117330]

Author: I agree it is similar.  The last line seems important for people who are familiar enough with PL/pgSQL programming (I'm not though).  I'd rather keep it here for future reference, seems edge-casey and thus someone may eventually care

> - Fixed a bug in [PL/pgSQL](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/plpgsql) where altering the name of a [sequence](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/create-sequence) or [user-defined type (UDT)](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/create-type) that was used in a PL/pgSQL function or procedure could break them. This bug affected routines that were created in an implicit transaction, and not using `CREATE OR REPLACE` syntax. [#117330][#117330]

Reviewer: I agree, but is it possible the two notes are describing the same thing and can be consolidated?

> - Fixed a bug in [PL/pgSQL](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/plpgsql) where altering the name of a [sequence](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/create-sequence) or [user-defined type (UDT)](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/create-type) that was used in a PL/pgSQL function or procedure could break them. This bug affected routines that were created in an implicit transaction, and not using `CREATE OR REPLACE` syntax. [#117330][#117330]

Author: perhaps! I will ask the engineers from those PRs and see what they say

> - Fixed a bug in [PL/pgSQL](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/plpgsql) where altering the name of a [sequence](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/create-sequence) or [user-defined type (UDT)](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/create-type) that was used in a PL/pgSQL function or procedure could break them. This bug affected routines that were created in an implicit transaction, and not using `CREATE OR REPLACE` syntax. [#117330][#117330]

Author: I checked and they can be consolidated by keeping the first one, which I'm doing now.  thank you for pushing on this

- The new [`SELECT FOR UPDATE`](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/select-for-update) implementation used under [Read Committed isolation](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/read-committed) (and under [Serializable isolation](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/demo-serializable) when the `optimizer_use_lock_op_for_serializable` [session variable](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/session-variables) is `true`) now locks all [column families](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/column-families) instead of only the first column family. [#116826][#116826]
- Fixed a bug where [`SELECT FOR UPDATE`](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/select-for-update) under [Read Committed isolation](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/read-committed) on multi-column-family tables was not locking [column families](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/column-families) containing only key columns. [#116826][#116826]

> - It is now possible to run `CALL` statements with [`EXPLAIN`](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/explain). The `EXPLAIN (OPT)` variant will show the body of the procedure, while other variants will only show the procedure name and arguments. [#116274][#116274]

Author: NOICE

didn't see we had that!

w00t

✅

- Per-node [hot ranges](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/ui-hot-ranges-page) logging now logs the top 5 hot ranges on the local node instead of the top 5 hot ranges cluster-wide. [cockroachdb/cockroach#118334][#118334]

<h3 id="v23-2-1-command-line-changes">Command-line changes</h3>

- Added a new command `cockroach debug enterprise-check-fips`, which diagnoses errors in [FIPS](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/fips) deployments. [#115202][#115202]
- The new flag `--enterprise-require-fips-ready` can be added to any [`cockroach` command](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/cockroach-commands) to prevent startup if certain prerequisites for [FIPS](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/fips) compliance are not met. [#115202][#115202]
- [`cockroach workload`](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/cockroach-workload) commands now appropriately invoke `.Close` in the case of an error. [#116487][#116487]

<h3 id="v23-2-1-db-console-changes">DB Console changes</h3>

- Updated the "CPU Time" label on the [Runtime Dashboard](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/ui-runtime-dashboard) to "SQL CPU Time" and added clarifications to its tooltip. [#116449][#116449]

> - [Statement bundles](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/ui-statements-page#diagnostics) are now enabled for Serverless clusters. [cockroachdb/cockroach#117529][#117529]

Author: ordinarily I'd agree.  in this case I'd rather not since this is a release note. because at this static moment in time when v23.2.1 is released, there is a thing called "serverless".  And I'd rather not have the name get rewritten if/when we change naming and strategy again because that new name won't necessarily mean anything in this (now past) context

> - [Statement bundles](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/ui-statements-page#diagnostics) are now enabled for Serverless clusters. [cockroachdb/cockroach#117529][#117529]

Reviewer: super good point

- The [Networking Dashboard](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/ui-networking-dashboard) is enhanced with charts that visualize number of packets received, number of receiving packets with error, number of receiving packets that got dropped, number of packets sent, number of sending packets with error, and number of sending packets that got dropped. [#116712][#116712]

> - The [Explain Plan](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/ui-statements-page#explain-plans) tab is now shown for the [Statements](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/ui-statements-page) and [Insights](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/ui-insights-page) pages, for Serverless clusters. [cockroachdb/cockroach#118169][#118169]

Author: s/Plan/Plans/

see other comment re: serverless variable

<h3 id="v23-2-1-bug-fixes">Bug fixes</h3>

> - Fixed a durability bug in [Raft log](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/architecture/replication-layer#raft) storage, caused by incorrect syncing of filesystem metadata. It was possible to lose writes of a particular kind (`AddSSTable`) that are used by e.g. [`RESTORE`](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/restore). This loss was possible only under power-off or operating system crash conditions. Under such conditions, CockroachDB could enter a crash loop on node restart. In the worst case of a coordinated power-off/crash across multiple nodes this could lead to an unrecoverable loss of [Raft quorum](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/architecture/replication-layer#raft). [#115709][#115709]

Author: just don't turn things off yo :-D

nice edit, much better to use past tense here - thanks :-)

- Fixed a bug where large [jobs](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/show-jobs) running with execution locality (such as some [changefeeds](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/changefeeds-in-multi-region-deployments#run-a-changefeed-job-by-locality)) could result in the [gateway](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/architecture/life-of-a-distributed-transaction#gateway) node being assigned most of the work, causing performance degradation and cluster instability [#115388][#115388]

> - Fixed a bug that caused node crashes and panics when running [`INSERT`](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/insert) queries on [`REGIONAL BY ROW` tables with `UNIQUE` constraints or indexes](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/alter-table#add-a-unique-index-to-a-regional-by-row-table). The bug was only present in version 23.2.0-beta.1. [#115668][#115668]

Author: ✅

> - Fixed a bug that existed only in 23.2 alpha and beta versions that could have caused side effects to happen out of order for [PL/pgSQL](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/plpgsql) routines in rare cases. [#115839][#115839]

Author: ✅

- Fixed a bug that existed since v23.1 that prevented naming [user-defined type (UDT)](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/create-type) parameters when dropping a [user-defined function](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/user-defined-functions) (or procedure). [cockroachdb/cockroach#115904][#115904]
- Fixed a bug where [scheduled jobs](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/show-schedules) using [external storage providers](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/create-external-connection) could fail shortly after node startup. [#115693][#115693]

> - Locking tables (e.g., with [`SELECT FOR UPDATE`](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/select-for-update)) on the null-extended side of [outer joins](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/joins) (e.g., the right side of a `LEFT JOIN`) is now disallowed and returns an error. This improves compatibility with Postgres and prevents ambiguity in [locking semantics](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/architecture/transaction-layer#concurrency-control). This bug has existed since locking with `FOR UPDATE` was introduced. [#115878][#115878]

Author: my least favorite thing in our style guide :-} 

however I will comply ✅ 

from https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/history.html : 

> Many people continue to refer to PostgreSQL as “Postgres” (now rarely in all capital letters) because of tradition or because it is easier to pronounce. This usage is widely accepted as a nickname or alias.

- Fixed a bug that would cause a syntax error during [redaction](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/configure-logs#redact-logs) of a [PL/pgSQL](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/plpgsql) routine. The bug existed only in v23.2 alpha and beta releases. [#116713][#116713]
- Fixed a bug that would cause syntax errors when attempting to [`RESTORE`](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/restore) a database with [PL/pgSQL](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/plpgsql) [user-defined functions (UDFs)](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/user-defined-functions) or [stored procedures](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/stored-procedures). This bug only affected v23.2 alpha and beta releases. [#116713][#116713]

> - [`UPDATE`](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/update), [`UPSERT`](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/upsert), and [`INSERT ON CONFLICT`](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/insert#on-conflict-clause) queries are now disallowed under [Read Committed isolation](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/read-committed) when the table contains a [check constraint](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/check) involving a [column family](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/column-families) that is updated, and the check constraint also involves a column family that is *not* updated, but *is* read. This is a temporary fix to prevent possible violation of the check constraint, and the restriction will be lifted in the future. [#116428][#116428]

Author: ✅

> - Previously, all `AggHistogram`-powered metrics were not reporting quantiles properly in the [DB Console](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/ui-overview). This patch fixes the histograms so that the quantiles in DB Console are reported correctly. Please note: these histograms were only broken in the [DB Console metrics dashboards](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/ui-overview-dashboard), but were **not** broken in the [Prometheus-compatible endpoint](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/monitoring-and-alerting#prometheus-endpoint), `/_status/vars`. The list of affected metrics is shown below. [#114506][#114506]

Author: ✅

  - `changefeed.message_size_hist`
  - `changefeed.parallel_io_queue_nanos`
  - `changefeed.sink_batch_hist_nanos`
  - `changefeed.flush_hist_nanos`
  - `changefeed.commit_latency`
  - `changefeed.admit_latency`
  - `jobs.row_level_ttl.span_total_duration`
  - `jobs.row_level_ttl.select_duration`
  - `jobs.row_level_ttl.delete_duration`

> - Fixed a bug introduced in v23.2 that causes internal errors and panics when certain SQL queries run with automatic [index recommendation](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/ui-databases-page#index-recommendations) collection enabled. [cockroachdb/cockroach#117453][#117453]

Author: ✅

- Fixed a bug that could cause a function resolution error when attempting to use a [builtin function](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/functions-and-operators) like `now()` as a formatting argument to a [PL/pgSQL](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/plpgsql) `RAISE` statement. [#116825][#116825]
- Fixed a bug where CDC custom key columns did not function correctly with [CDC queries](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/create-and-configure-changefeeds). For example, `CREATE CHANGEFEED WITH key_column=..., unordered AS SELECT * FROM table` now works correctly instead of retrying forever. Note that some functionalities with CDC custom keys are not fully supported, see [#115267][#115267] for more details. [cockroachdb/cockroach#116967][#116967]

> - Fixed a bug in [Raft log](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/architecture/replication-layer#raft) truncation that could lead to crash loops, and unrecoverable loss of [quorum](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/architecture/replication-layer#raft) in the unlikely worst case that all [replicas](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/architecture/overview#architecture-replica) enter this crash loop. The bug manifested when a few things coincided: The cluster was running a bulk write workload (e.g. [schema change](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/online-schema-changes), [import](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/copy), [`RESTORE`](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/restore)); a log truncation command was running; and the process crashed at an unfortunate moment (e.g. the process was killed, or killed itself for reasons like detecting a [disk stall](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/cluster-setup-troubleshooting#disk-stalls)). [#116574][#116574]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Fixed a bug in [Raft log](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/architecture/replication-layer#raft) truncation that could lead to crash loops, and unrecoverable loss of [quorum](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/architecture/replication-layer#raft) in the unlikely worst case that all [replicas](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/architecture/overview#architecture-replica) enter this crash loop. The bug manifested when a few things coincided: The cluster was running a bulk write workload (e.g., [schema change](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/online-schema-changes), [import](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/copy), [`RESTORE`](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/restore)); a log truncation command was running; and the process crashed at an unfortunate moment (e.g., the process was killed, or killed itself for reasons like detecting a [disk stall](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/cluster-setup-troubleshooting#disk-stalls)). [#116574][#116574]
```

- Fixed a bug where concurrent [`GRANT`](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/grant) statements can cause deadlocks. [#117713][#117713]
- CockroachDB can now transparently retry more retryable errors when performing a non-atomic [`COPY`](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/copy-from) command. [cockroachdb/cockroach#117895][#117895]
- Fixed a bug that caused [DML statements](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/performance-best-practices-overview#dml-best-practices) to fail while a [hash-sharded index](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/hash-sharded-indexes) was being created. The symptom of this bug was an error like `column "crdb_internal_val_shard_16" does not exist`. This bug was present since v23.1.0. [#118215][#118215]

> - Previously, CockroachDB could encounter the error `unable to encode table key: *tree.DTSQuery` when operating on columns with the internal `TSQuery` type in some contexts (e.g. when collecting [table statistics](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/cost-based-optimizer#table-statistics) or when performing a [`DISTINCT` operation](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/select-clause#eliminate-duplicate-rows)), and this is now fixed. The bug had been present since v23.1 when support for the internal `TSQuery` type was added. [cockroachdb/cockroach#118321][#118321]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Previously, CockroachDB could encounter the error `unable to encode table key: *tree.DTSQuery` when operating on columns with the internal `TSQuery` type in some contexts (e.g., when collecting [table statistics](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/cost-based-optimizer#table-statistics) or when performing a [`DISTINCT` operation](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/select-clause#eliminate-duplicate-rows)). This is now fixed. The bug had been present since v23.1 when support for the internal `TSQuery` type was added. [cockroachdb/cockroach#118321][#118321]
```

Author: ✅

- Previously, in some cases CockroachDB could incorrectly evaluate queries that scanned an [inverted index](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/inverted-indexes) and had a [`WHERE` filter](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/select-clause#where-clause) in which two sides of the `AND` expression had "similar" expressions (e.g. `ARRAY['str1'] <@ col AND (ARRAY['str1'] && col OR ...)`); this is now fixed. The bug had been present since prior to v22.2. [#118360][#118360]
- Fixed a bug that could cause [`DELETE`](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/delete) queries sent by the [row-level TTL](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/row-level-ttl) [job](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/show-schedules) to use a [secondary index](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/indexes) rather than the [primary index](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/primary-key) to find the rows to delete. This could lead to some `DELETE` operations taking a much longer time than they should. This bug was present since v22.2.0. [#118337][#118337]

> - Fixed the issue where we were missing data on SQL statistics and consequently missing data on the [SQL Activity page](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/ui-overview#sql-activity) by properly recalculating the value from the current and past hour on the top activity table. [cockroachdb/cockroach#118378][#118378]

Reviewer: This one reads a bit unclear to me (not sure what "top activity table" means in this context).

```suggestion
- Fixed an issue with missing data on SQL statistics, and consequently missing data on the [SQL Activity page](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/ui-overview#sql-activity), by properly recalculating the value from the current and past hour on the top activity table. [cockroachdb/cockroach#118378][#118378]
```

Author: ✅
